Cybersecurity Internship Project at Elevate Labs


  Task 1: Scan Your Local Network for Open Ports




* Objective: Learn to discover open ports on devices in your     local network to understand  network exposure.


* Tools: Nmap , Wireshark 




Description :
* Conducted TCP SYN scans on a local network using Nmap to discover live hosts and open ports.

* Analyzed scan results to identify common services and assess associated security risks.

* Utilized Wireshark for optional packet capture and traffic analysis.

* Saved and documented scan outputs in text and HTML formats for reporting purposes.



   *  Nmap was already installed virtually on VMware 
   *  Found my local ip range : 192.168.24.194
          Command used to find ip range is :  ip addr
          
 (Proof of concept attached )
  





   *  Command tasked to  run :  nmap -sS 192.168.24.194


Description 


nmap: This is the command-line tool you're using — Nmap (Network Mapper), a   powerful tool for network discovery and security auditing.

  -sS: This flag tells Nmap to perform a TCP SYN Scan, also known as a        "half-open" scan.

   * It sends a SYN packet to the target port.

   * If the port is open, it responds with a SYN-ACK.

   * Nmap then does not complete the connection — it sends an RST (reset) packet instead. That’s why it’s called half-open.

   * This scan is stealthy and fast, and is the default scan when run as root/admin.
192.168.24.194: This is the target IP address /local IP range — in most home networks, this is the router/gateway IP.


(Proof of concept attached)


  



      *  Open ports found : 


PORT           STATE          SERVICE


135/tcp      open             msrpc
139/tcp      open             netbios-ssn
445/tcp      open             microsoft-ds
902/tcp      open            iss-realsecure
      * Identify Potential Services And  Security Risks From Open Ports.
Port 135
Service: Microsoft RPC (Remote Procedure Call)

Description: Used by Microsoft’s DCOM and RPC services for communication between client and server applications. Commonly used in Windows networking and management tasks.

Security Risk: Exploited in Worm attacks (e.g., Blaster, Sasser).

Recommendation: Block port 135 at the firewall/perimeter if not required.

---
Port 139
Service: NetBIOS Session Service

Description: Used for Windows file and printer sharing over older NetBIOS protocol. Allows communication between Windows devices in a local network.

Security Risk: Enables enumeration of shared folders, users, and system information.

Recommendation: Disable NetBIOS over TCP/IP if not required.

---
Port 445
Service: Microsoft-DS (SMB over TCP)

Description: Used by Server Message Block (SMB) protocol for file sharing, printer access, and inter-process communication in Windows networks.

Security Risk: Commonly targeted by ransomware and worms (WannaCry, NotPetya, EternalBlue exploits).

Recommendation: Block port 445 on public-facing systems.

---
 Port 902
Service: VMware Server Console / VMware Authentication Daemon

Description: Used for VMware remote management, particularly for connections between VMware clients and ESXi hosts or vCenter.

Security Risk: If exposed to the internet, can allow unauthorized remote access to VMware services. 

Recommendation: Restrict access to trusted admin networks only.

Do not expose VMware ports (902/903/443) to the internet.
